Create blogpost 'callPackage, a tool for the lazy' (#41)
NixOS/nixos-summer: content/blog/callpackage-a-tool-for-the-lazy.md

It is used to build the Nix package collection, known as [`nixpkgs`](https://github.com/nixos/nixpkgs) – the largest, most up-to-date open source software distribution in the world.

Being purely functional, the Nix language allows declaring custom functions to abstract over common patterns.
One such pattern is parametrization of package definitions, that is, builds which can vary by their dependencies or settings.

`nixpkgs` is a sizeable software project on it's own, with coding conventions and idioms that have emerged over the years.
It has [established a convention](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/pull/9869) of composing parameterized packages with automatic settings through a function named [`callPackage`](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/commit/fd268b4852d39c18e604c584dd49a611dc795a9b).

This article shows how to use it and why it's beneficial.

## Basic examples

Before even discussing the benefits, let's see how it actually gets used.

Given are the files `hello.nix` and `default.nix`:

```nix
# default.nix
let pkgs = import <nixpkgs> {}; in
pkgs.callPackage ./hello.nix {}
```

`default.nix` produces a *derivation* from the contents of `hello.nix`.

> This what the Nix package manager calls its build results (which are often packaged executables, but can be arbitrary files), and what the Nix language calls the data type of such an expression.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is what the Nix package manager calls its build results (which are often packaged executables, but can be arbitrary files), and what the Nix language calls the data type of such an expression.
```

Is "This" referring to *derivation*? And is *build results* an official term? I guess we are skipping the whole .drv file story here if you say it's executables and files. Maybe that's good but we could try to at least mention it so that we don't confuse those who know about them.

Reviewer 2: "build result" is something we came up with with @Ericson2314 when trying to explain Nix architecture with more generic terms. Actually that original sentence turned out wrong, because derivations (which we generically called "build task") are descriptions of how to obtain build results.

```suggestion
A derivation is what the Nix package manager calls a description of how to obtain a desired build result. Build results are often packaged executables, but can be arbitrary files. Derivation is also the data type of the corresponding expression in the Nix language.
```

```nix
# hello.nix
{ writeShellScriptBin }:
writeShellScriptBin "hello" ''
  echo "hello, world!"
''
```

`hello.nix` declares a function which takes as argument an attribute set with one element `writeShellScriptBin`. `writeShellScriptBin` is also a function, which happens to return a derivation. The build result in this case is an executable shell script with the contents `echo "hello world"` named `"hello"`.

Building using `nix-build` (which implicitly evaluates `default.nix` unless told otherwise) will produce `./result/bin/hello`, and running the resulting script will nicely greet you.

As you can see, `writeShellScriptBin` gets passed in by `callPackage` automatically.

> It may appear cumbersome to create an extra file for the package in such a simple setup.

Reviewer 2: I don't see why we should switch to addressing the reader and assume something about them.

> It may appear cumbersome to create an extra file for the package in such a simple setup.

Reviewer: Fine not doing so. I edited the suggestion.

> It may appear cumbersome to create an extra file for the package in such a simple setup.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It may appear cumbersome to create an extra file for `hello.nix` in such a simple setup.
```

But in fact, this is exactly how `nixpkgs` is organized: every package is a file that declares a function.

> This function takes as arguments the package's dependencies.

Reviewer 2: I think explaining how `callPackage` works deserves its own blog post, and fear that just saying "it has stuff inside that it uses implicitly" creates more confusion than it solves, but it's probably better than nothing.

```suggestion
This function takes as arguments Nix expressions which the package requires as dependencies to produce its build outputs.
Conceptually this is an alternative to `import` expressions.
In the case of our `hello.nix` function, we depend on the `writeShellScriptBin` function.
But we could also import other derivations, attribute sets, lists, and whatever else Nix offers.
The difference to `import` is that `callPackages` injects the dependencies explicitly from the context it carries.
We can thus control what gets imported quite easily from within the language.
```

> This function takes as arguments the package's dependencies.

Author: Considering how "`import`" (and conceptionally equivalent) usually works in the languages I know beyond nix (python, rust, go, elixir, haskell) I think that "`import` statement" is generally more correct.

```suggestion
This function takes as arguments Nix expressions which the package requires as dependencies to produce its build outputs.
Conceptually this is an alternative to `import` statements.
In the case of our `hello.nix` function, we depend on the `writeShellScriptBin` function.
But we could also import other derivations, attribute sets, lists, and whatever else Nix offers.
The difference to `import` is that `callPackages` injects the dependencies explicitly from the context it carries.
We can thus control what gets imported quite easily from within the language.
```

would be therefore my counterproposal

> This function takes as arguments the package's dependencies.

Reviewer 2: Hm, but `import` is an expression which evaluates whatever is in the given file, with a side effect of reading the file. It does not change the program state. See for example: https://stackoverflow.com/questions/19132/expression-versus-statement/19224#19224

> This function takes as arguments the package's dependencies.

Author: An expression can be replaced with its returned value. What value does `import Foo.Bar` return?

It changes as a sideffect the bindings available in the current scope.

`with args; foo` though is an expression, as you could replace that with whatever the value of `args.foo` is.

Also, as far as I remember, rust, haskell, elixir and go all refer to their equivalent of `import` as a statement. Even though indeed in elixir a value is returned, but just having the returned value inline wouldn't compile into the same module.

The only `import` style mechanism that I could live with calling an expression was Cs `#inlcude`, though that doesn't count as it is actually a compiler directive.

> This function takes as arguments the package's dependencies.

Reviewer: One more tiny change:

```suggestion
This function takes as arguments Nix expressions which the package requires as dependencies to produce its build outputs.
Conceptually this is an alternative to `import` statements.
In the case of our `hello.nix` function, we depend on the `writeShellScriptBin` function.
But we could also depend on other derivations, attribute sets, lists, and whatever else Nix offers.
The difference to `import` that pulls in dependencies from some global context is that `callPackages` injects the dependencies explicitly from the `pkgs` attribute set where it is defined itself (see file `default.nix`).
We can thus control what gets imported quite easily from within the language.
```

> This function takes as arguments the package's dependencies.

Reviewer 2: > An expression can be replaced with its returned value. What value does import Foo.Bar return?
>
> It changes as a sideffect the bindings available in the current scope, reading a file is not the relevant effect here.

That is news to me. `import` returns the value read from the path in its argument. It does not change anything in its scope. You cannot do `import foo.bar` unless `foo.bar` evaluates to a string that, if interpreted as a file system path, will point to a valid Nix file.

Check the [Nix manual](https://nixos.org/manual/nix/stable/language/builtins.html#builtins-import) for reference.

> This function takes as arguments the package's dependencies.

Author: Oh! We are talking about Nix' `import`, totally forgot that one…

Yes, thats an expression.

> This function takes as arguments the package's dependencies.

Author: Will need to sit down later to "cherry-pick" from the various suggestions.

In worst case I won't be able to do that before sitting in the train tomorrow.

> This function takes as arguments the package's dependencies.

Reviewer: Right, now I understand as well. I was not at all thinking about the nixpkgs `import` expression but about what import means in Python, Haskell etc.... The goal was to refer to something that may be more familiar than Nix to the reader. I see the confusion now.

> This function takes as arguments the package's dependencies.

Author: ```suggestion
This function takes as arguments Nix expressions which the package requires as dependencies to produce its build outputs.
Conceptually this is an alternative to [`import` expressions](https://nixos.org/manual/nix/stable/language/builtins.html?highlight=import#builtins-import).
In the case of our `hello.nix` function, we depend on the `writeShellScriptBin` function.
But we could also import other derivations, attribute sets, lists, and whatever else `nixpkgs` offers.
The difference to `import` that pulls in dependencies from some context is that `callPackages` injects the dependencies explicitly from the `pkgs` attribute set where it is defined itself (see file `default.nix`).
We can thus control what gets imported quite easily from within the language.
```

This is what I came up with after trying to conclude the discussion here.

> This function takes as arguments the package's dependencies.

Reviewer 2: > The difference to `import` that pulls in dependencies from some context is that `callPackages` injects the dependencies explicitly from the `pkgs` attribute set where it is defined itself (see file `default.nix`).

I don't understand what you mean by "pulls in dependencies from some context". As we discussed above, `import` does nothing except parsing and evaluating a Nix file and returning that value. I think, and you illustrate this later in the article, is that instead of having to explicitly pass each dependency, e.g.

```nix
package = import ./package.nix { inherit dep1, dep2, dep3 };
```

we can use `callPackage` to automatically inject these dependencies from the context we provide it with, which is usually the `pkgs` attrset.

> This function takes as arguments the package's dependencies.

Reviewer: Yea I think we are getting tangled up in confusion now. I originally didn't mean to introduce the _Nix_ import expression but I wanted to refer to import statements as they are used in languages like Python to make it easier to understand for readers who come from those worlds. But since Nix also has _imports_ this started the confusion that we are now fighting with. Here is another try:

```suggestion
This function takes as arguments Nix expressions which the package requires to produce its build outputs.
In the case of our `hello.nix` function, we depend on the `writeShellScriptBin` function.
But we could also import other derivations, attribute sets, lists, and whatever else `nixpkgs` offers.
Conceptually this [dependency injection](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dependency_injection) approach is an alternative to `import` statements as they are used in languages like Python that pull in dependencies from some context.
With `callPackages` we can inject dependencies explicitly from a specific `pkgs` attribute set (see file `default.nix`).
This approach gives control over what the dependencies of `hello.nix` are to the caller something which will turn out useful.
```

> This function takes as arguments the package's dependencies.

Reviewer 2: Ah. Okay that would have been super confusing when I read this for the first time without context. We're talking about Nix language, and arguing from the perspective of any other language will lose the rest of the world who are not familiar with any of the specific examples. You just need too much contextual knowledge to make sense of such a side note.

> This function takes as arguments the package's dependencies.

Reviewer: Is it still confusing now? I wrote this under the assumption that more people are familiar with Python of Javascript then Nix. There are btw tons of discussions of this dependency-injection / inversion of control pattern in those domains as well.

> This function takes as arguments the package's dependencies.

Reviewer: >  readers who do not know Python or Javascript? Which is most people. Even most software developers.

OK among developers I am not so sure about this since Python and JS are language 1 and 2, and if you widen this up to other languages with similar import mechanisms (C, C++, Java) you get surely a vast majority. Even beyond import statements, the most common pattern to depend on another function is rarely to inject them as arguments. Typically you leave control of what to import to the function instead of to the caller which is why this is an _inversion_ of control pattern. This contrast with the usual approach, the benefits and disadvantages that it brings, is what makes the pattern interesting and noteworthy in the first place and difficult to understand. If `hello.nix` would just import `writeShellScriptBin` from another file or some global context of nixpkgs we would probably not have started writing this article.

But I'm fine leaving it out if it is so controversial. I think the post doesn't depend on it and we can agree to disagree :) Here is a version without it:

```
This function takes as arguments Nix expressions which the package requires to produce its build outputs.
In the case of our `hello.nix` function, we depend on the `writeShellScriptBin` function.
But we could also depend on other derivations, attribute sets, lists, and whatever else `nixpkgs` offers.
With `callPackages` we can inject these dependencies explicitly from a specific `pkgs` attribute set (see file `default.nix`).
This approach gives control over the dependencies of `hello.nix` to the caller something which will turn out useful.
```

> This function takes as arguments the package's dependencies.

Author: > With `callPackages` we can inject these dependencies explicitly from a specific `pkgs` attribute set (see file `default.nix`).

Shouldn't this be "implicitely"? As `callPackage` will use what it "knows" unless explicitely overriden in the second argument?

I like this last version though. It manages to not mention `import` at all quite well and avoids the confusion we had.

}
```

Note that the resulting attribute set is now recursive (by the keyword `rec`), that is, attribute values can refer to names from within the same attribute.

Here we take the `hello` derivation and call its `override` attribute as a function, passing the attribute set `{  `audience = "folks"; }`. `override` passes `audience` to the original function in `hello.nix` - to be precise, *overrides* whatever arguments have been passed in the original `callPackage` that produced the derivation `hello`.

Building and running the `folks` attribute with `nix-build -A folks` will again produce a new version of the script.
It will print, as you may expect, `hello folks`.

All the other parameters will remain the same as they have been when `hello` was
instantiated.

This is especially useful and often seen on packages that provide many
options to customize the build.

An example to mention here is the [`neovim`](https://search.nixos.org/packages?channel=22.05&show=neovim&from=0&size=50&sort=relevance&type=packages&query=neovim) attribute in nixpkgs, which has has 
some overrideable arguments like `extraLuaPackages`, `extraPythonPackages`, or
`withRuby`.

> ## 3. Benefit: modifiable

Reviewer 2: This?
```suggestion
## 3. Benefit: configurable dependency injection
```

> ## 3. Benefit: modifiable

Reviewer: Any of your two suggestions look better to me. No strong opinion but I have a light preference for "flexible".

handy when you have large sets where the attributes to be built depend on each
other.

> **Note**
> In the next examples I will not implement or show the "called" 
> files, as I think they are not necessary to understand the point I
> want to make.

Consider the following attribute set of derivations:

```nix
# default.nix
let pkgs = import <nixpkgs> { }; in
rec {
  a = pkgs.callPackage ./a.nix { };
  b = pkgs.callPackage ./b.nix { inherit a; };
  c = pkgs.callPackage ./c.nix { inherit b; };
  d = pkgs.callPackage ./d.nix { };
  e = pkgs.callPackage ./e.nix { inherit c d; };
}
```

Note that `inherit a;` is equivalent to `a = a;`.
That is, we're passing previously declared derivations as arguments to other derivations through `callPackage`.

In this case you have to remember to manually pass arguments required by each package in the respective `.nix` file if they are not in `nixpkgs`.
This is due to how `pkgs.callPackage` works: it passes attributes that exist in `pkgs` to the called function if the argument names match.

If `./b.nix` requires an argument `a` but there is no `pkgs.a`, the function call will produce an error.

> This can become quite tedious quickly, especially the larger the set becomes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This can become quite tedious quickly, especially for larger sets.
```

Therefore we can use `lib.callPackageWith` to create our own `callPackage`:

```nix
# default.nix
let
  pkgs = import <nixpkgs> { };
  callPackage = lib.callPackageWith (pkgs // packages);
  packages = {
    a = callPackage ./a.nix { };
    b = callPackage ./b.nix { };
    c = callPackage ./c.nix { };
    d = callPackage ./d.nix { };
    e = callPackage ./e.nix { };
  };
in
  packages
```

> Our modified `callPackage` now will exactly "know" how to resolve the dependencies
> through the set defined by `pkgs // packages`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Our modified `callPackage` now will exactly "know" how to resolve the dependencies through the set defined by `pkgs // packages`.
```

Nix' laziness does us a good favour here and makes this actually possible.

## Summary

> Using `callPackage` does not only follow `nixpkgs` conventions, making your code easy to follow for experienced Nix users. It also gives you some things for free:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using `callPackage` is not only a `nixpkgs` conventions.
It makes your code easy to follow for experienced Nix users, and it gives you some benefits for free:
```

Reviewer 2: My point here was that following conventions is what makes your code readable for other Nixers. Following conventions is not a benefit on its own.

@MMesch Does that make it clearer?
```suggestion
Using `callPackage` does not only follow `nixpkgs` conventions, which makes your code easier to follow for experienced Nix users. It also gives you some benefits for free:
```

Reviewer: yes, lgtm.

---
title: callPackage, a tool for the lazy
date: 2022-08-25
extra:
  author: Norbert Melzer
---

> In [`nixpkgs`](https://github.com/nixos/nixpkgs), there is a massive use of the
> `callPackage` function, which provides us with a lot of benefits.

Reviewer 2: This could reach a substantially broader audience if you added a brief introduction. Something along these lines:

```suggestion
The Nix package manager ships with a a special-purpose programming language for creating packages and configurations: the Nix language. It is used to build the Nix package collection, known as [`nixpkgs`](https://github.com/nixos/nixpkgs) – the largest, most up-to-date open source software distribution in the world.

Being purely functional, the Nix language allows declaring custom functions to abstract over common patterns.  One such pattern is parametrization of package definitions, that is, builds which can vary by their dependencies or settings.

`nixpkgs` is a sizeable software project on it's own, with coding conventions and idioms that have emerged over the years.
It has [established a convention](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/pull/9869) of composing parameterized packages with automatic settings through a function named [`callPackage`](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/commit/fd268b4852d39c18e604c584dd49a611dc795a9b).

This article shows how to use it and why it's beneficial.
```

Author: Thanks, abstracts and introductions are a weak point of mine :D

## Basic examples

> Though before even discussing the benefits, lets see how it actually gets used.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Before even discussing the benefits, let's see how it actually gets used.
```

> Given are these 2 files `hello.nix` and `default.nix`:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Given are the files `hello.nix` and `default.nix`:
```

> ```nix
> # Usually I would prefer the usage of nix flakes, though that would
> # introduce a lot of boilerplate in the examples for no reason,
> # therefore I will use diamond paths and `import` for simplicity.
> ```

Reviewer 2: Is that supposed to be a side note? Why not

```suggestion
> **Note**
> Usually I would prefer the usage of Nix flakes.
> But that would introduce a lot of boilerplate in the examples for no reason.
> Therefore I will use diamond paths and `import` for simplicity.
```

otherwise

```suggestion
```nix
# Usually I would prefer the usage of Nix flakes. But that would
# introduce a lot of boilerplate in the examples for no reason.
# Therefore I will use diamond paths and `import` for simplicity.
```
```

Reviewer 2: I would really like to see you qualify why you prefer flakes. I know for a fact that most beginners are utterly confused about flakes (what, why, benefits, support status, ...). So while I suppose you're addressing readers of your own knowledge level, who may object to your choice of example, you're the exception, not the norm. Of the [~21 million professional software developers in the world](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Software_engineering_demographics) maybe 50-100k even heard Nix, and something on the order of 2k may be proficient enough to remotely know what you're talking about. That is, at best we'd be missing missing 99,5%  of our target audience if we don't take care of a proper introduction.

Author: 1. Using a blockquote for the note felt even more wrong semantically :D But yeah, we have to live with what we get in markdown :D
2. I understand your objections, and I think, that it will be the best then, to just remove that note then. Explaining why to use flakes would probably fill another blogpost :D

Author: I see you already chaged it, I think we can resolve this then. Thanks :+1:

Reviewer 2: No, that was the other thing with string printing.

Author: I'm not sure what GH did here, though I am pretty sure I did the comment on the correct thread…

Author: Removed in 1d65f8b381e3e1ff397288ddd6b0a3b653857f5a

```nix
# default.nix
let pkgs = import <nixpkgs> {}; in
pkgs.callPackage ./hello.nix {}
```

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

`default.nix` produces a *derivation* from the contents of `hello.nix`.
This what the Nix package manager calls its build results (which are often packaged executables, but can be arbitrary files), and what the Nix language calls the data type of such an expression.

```

```nix
# hello.nix

> {writeShellScriptBin}:

Reviewer 2: [`nixpkgs` style](https://nixos.org/manual/nixpkgs/stable/#chap-conventions) (sorry, no anchor to the relevant entry)

```suggestion
{ writeShellScriptBin }:
```

writeShellScriptBin "hello" ''
  echo "hello, world!"
''
```

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

`hello.nix` declares a function with one argument `writeShellScriptBin`. `writeShellScriptBin` is also a function, which happens to return a derivation. The build result in this case is an executable shell script with the contents `echo "hello world"` named `"hello"`.

```

> Building using `nix-build` will produce `./result/bin/hello`, and running it will
> nicely greet you.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Building using `nix-build` will produce `./result/bin/hello`, and running the resulting script will
nicely greet you.
```

> As you can see, `writeShellScriptBin` gets passed in by `callPackage` automatically.

Reviewer 2: On a personal note, this is really auto*magical* and potentially very very confusing if you don't know that. Great that you decided to write this article.

Author: I will sit down during lunch time and see if I can rephrase this paragraph to explain a tad more without making the post explode.

I explicitely wanted to avoid "how does it work" in favor of "why do you want to use it"

Reviewer 2: > I explicitely wanted to avoid "how does it work" in favor of "why do you want to use it"

That's fine, but I think a bird's eye view is in order. I think I added something in one of the suggestions already, you may pull that out here.

Author: I am not a friend of the term "automagically", ruby spoiled me.

I hope 91be10f64694cb33fdf024e382f6106978435d10 is still in the spirit of your suggested changes.

> For this simple setup, having to create an extra file, seems to be a lot of
> boilerplate, though if you continue reading, you will see, it is worth it!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It may appear cumbersome to create an extra file for the package in such a simple setup.
In fact, this is exactly how `nixpkgs` is organized: every package is a file that declares a function.
This function takes as arguments the package's dependencies.

If you continue reading, you will see the benefits of this pattern!
```

## 1. Benefit: parametrized builds

> Now lets change the `default.nix`:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Let's change the `default.nix`:
```

```nix
# default.nix
let pkgs = import <nixpkgs> { }; in
{
  hello = pkgs.callPackage ./hello.nix { };
}
```

> Now we build using `nix-build -A hello`, the outcome will be the same as above.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When we build it with `nix-build -A hello` (accessing the attribtue `hello` with the `-A` flag), the outcome will be the same as before.
```

> Now to "parametrize" the build we also change the `hello.nix` a bit:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We also change `hello.nix` to add an additional parameter `audience` with default value `"world"`:
```

```nix
# hello.nix
{ writeShellScriptBin
, audience ? "world"
}:
writeShellScriptBin "hello" ''
  echo "hello, ${audience}!"
''
```

> Building this will still yield the same output as before, though now things get
> interesting, alter your `default.nix` yet another time:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Building this will still yield the same output as before.

Things get more interesting when we alter `default.nix` another time, by adding a new attribute `people` to the result.

Note how we pass a parameter `audience` in the second argument to `callPackage`, which is handed over to the function defined in `hello.nix`:
```

```nix
# default.nix
let pkgs = import <nixpkgs> { }; in
{
  hello = pkgs.callPackage ./hello.nix { };
  people = pkgs.callPackage ./hello.nix { audience = "people"; };
}
```

> Building via `nix-build -A people` will now yield a script that prints "hello,
> people" instead.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Building via `nix-build -A people` will now yield a script that prints `"hello,
people"`.
```

Author: Oh, the semantics…

Here, in my opinion, it is either "hello, people" to quote what got printed, or `hello, people` to repeat it verbatim, though then the quotes can't be there.

To make it look more like on the terminal, I think I'll go with this.

```suggestion
Building via `nix-build -A people` will now yield a script that prints `hello,
people`.
```

Reviewer 2: You're absolutely right, I went a bit over the top there.

> We can use the very same syntax to also overwrite the automatically discovered

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We could use the very same syntax to also overwrite the automatically discovered
```

arguments like `writeShellScriptBin`, though that doesn't make sense here.

> Though, for a Go program that expects `buildGoModule` it is common to see some
> expression like `callPackage ./go-program.nix { buildGoModule = buildGo116Module; }`
> to enforce a certain Go compiler version.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For example, a Go program that expects `buildGoModule` it is common to see some
expression like `callPackage ./go-program.nix { buildGoModule = buildGo116Module; }`
to enforce a certain Go compiler version.
```

## 2. Benefit: overrides

As a consequence from the parametrized builds, we can also change the value of

> the parameters after the fact, using the derivations `override` function.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the parameters after the fact, using the resulting derivation's `override` function.
```

> As a consequence from the parametrized builds, we can also change the value of
> the parameters after the fact, using the derivations `override` function.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`callPackage` adds more convenience by adding an attribute to the derivation it returns: the `override` function.

That is, as a consequence of handling parametrized builds with `callPackage`, we can also change the value of the parameters after the fact, using the derivation's `override` function.
```

> Consider this new `default.nix`:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Consider this new `default.nix`, where we add a third attribute `folks`:
```

```nix
# default.nix
let pkgs = import <nixpkgs> { }; in
rec {
  hello = pkgs.callPackage ./hello.nix { };
  people = pkgs.callPackage ./hello.nix { audience = "people"; };
  folks = hello.override { audience = "folks"; };
}
```

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

Note that the resulting attribute set is now recursive (by the keyword `rec`), that is, attribute values can refer to names from within the same attribute.

Here we take the `hello` derivation and call its `override` attribute as a function, passing the attribute set `{  `audience = "folks"; }`. `override` passes `audience` to the original function in `hello.nix` - to be precise, *overrides* whatever arguments have been passed in the original `callPackage` that produced the derivation `hello`.

```

> Building and running the `folks` attribute, will give again a new version of the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Building and running the `folks` attribute with `nix-build -A folks`, will give again a new version of the
```

Always be explicit. The less people are proficient, i.e. already know what you're doing before you did it, the less you can expect them to have learned or abstracted over what you've shown.

> Building and running the `folks` attribute, will give again a new version of the
> script.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Building and running the `folks` attribute with `nix-build -A folks` will again produce a new version of the script.
It will print, as you may expect, `hello folks`.
```

Always be explicit. The less people are proficient, i.e. already know what you're doing before you did it, the less you can expect them to have learned or abstracted over what you've shown.

> All the other parameters will remain the same as the have been when `hello` was

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
All the other parameters will remain the same as they have been when `hello` was
```

instantiated.

> This is especially useful and often seen on packages that provide a whole lot of
> options to optimize the build.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This is especially useful and often seen on packages that provide many
options to customize the build.
```

> An example to mention here is the `neovim` attribute in nixpkgs, which has has 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
An example to mention here is the [`neovim`](https://search.nixos.org/packages?channel=22.05&show=neovim&from=0&size=50&sort=relevance&type=packages&query=neovim) attribute in nixpkgs, which has has 
```

some overrideable arguments like `extraLuaPackages`, `extraPythonPackages`, or
`withRuby`.

## 3. Benefit: modifiable

> And now I want to introduce one of my most favorite benefits:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
And now I want to introduce one of my favorite benefits:
```

I don't think something can be "more favorite".

> You can actually create your own version of `callPackage`, which comes in quite

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can actually create your own version of `callPackage`. This comes in quite
```

handy when you have large sets where the attributes to be built depend on each
other.

> ```nix
> # In the next examples I will not implement or show the "called" 
> # files, as I think they are not necessary to understand the point I
> # want to make.
> ```

Reviewer 2: As above

```suggestion
```nix
> **Note**
> In the following examples I will not implement or show the "called packages", as I think they are not necessary to understand the point I want to make.
```
```

```suggestion
```nix
# In the following examples I will not implement or show the "called 
# packages", as I think they are not necessary to understand the point I
# want to make.
```
```

Author: Changed in 1d65f8b381e3e1ff397288ddd6b0a3b653857f5a

> Consider the following initial version:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Consider the following attribute set of derivations:
```

```nix
# default.nix
let pkgs = import <nixpkgs> { }; in
rec {
  a = pkgs.callPackage ./a.nix { };
  b = pkgs.callPackage ./b.nix { inherit a; };
  c = pkgs.callPackage ./c.nix { inherit b; };
  d = pkgs.callPackage ./d.nix { };
  e = pkgs.callPackage ./e.nix { inherit c d; };
}
```

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

Note that `inherit a;` is equivalent to `a = a;`.
That is, we're passing previously declared derivations as arguments to other derivations through `callPackage`.

```

> Here you have to remember passing required arguments that are not in nixpkgs'
> toplevel manually.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this case you have to remember to manually pass arguments required by each package in the respective `.nix` file if they are not in `nixpkgs`.
This is due to how `pkgs.callPackage` works: it passes attributes that exist in `pkgs` to the called function if the argument names match.

If `./b.nix` requires an argument `a` but there is no `pkgs.a`, the function call will produce an error.
```

This can become quite tedious quickly, especially the larger the set becomes.

> Therefore we can use `lib.callPackageWith` to create our own `callPackage` version.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Therefore we can use `lib.callPackageWith` to create our own `callPackage`.
```

```nix
# default.nix
let
  pkgs = import <nixpkgs> { };
  callPackage = lib.callPackageWith (pkgs // packages);
  packages = {
    a = callPackage ./a.nix { };
    b = callPackage ./b.nix { };
    c = callPackage ./c.nix { };
    d = callPackage ./d.nix { };
    e = callPackage ./e.nix { };
  };
in
  packages
```

> Our modified `callPackage` now will exactly "know" how to resolve the dependencies
> through the set defined by `pkgs // packages`.
> 
> Nix' laziness does us a good favour here and makes this actually possible.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

First of all note that instead of a recursive attribute set, the names we operate on are now assigned in a `let` binding.
It has the same property as recursive sets: names on the left can be used in expressions on the right of the equal sign (`=`).

This is how we can refer to `packages` when we merge its contents with the pre-existing attribute set `pkgs` using the `//` operator.

Our custom `callPackages` now makes available all the attributes in `pkgs` *and* `packages` to the called package function (the same names from `packages` taking precedence), and  `packages` is being built up recursively with each call.

The last bit may make your head spin. This construction is only possible because the Nix language is lazily evaluated. That is, values are only computed when they are actually needed. It allows passing `packages` around without having fully defined it.

Each package's dependencies are now implicit at this level (they are still explicit in each of the package files), and `callPackage` "knows" how to resolve them.
This relieves us from dealing with them manually, and precludes configuration errors that may only surface late into a lengthy build process.

Of course this small example is still manageable in the original form, and the implicitly recursive variant probably obscures the structure for software developers not familiar with lazy evaluation, making it harder to read for them than it was before.

But this benefit really pays off for large constructions, where it is the amount of code that would obscure the structure, and where manual modifications would become cumbersome and error-prone.
```

```

## Summary

> So using `callPackage` doesn't only make your code uniform to what you see a lot
> in nixpkgs already, it also gives you some things for free:
> 
> 1. parametrized builds
> 2. overrideable builds
> 3. cleaner implementation of large interdepending package sets

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Using `callPackage` does not only follow `nixpkgs` conventions, making your code easy to follow for experienced Nix users. It also gives you some things for free:

1. parametrized builds
2. overridable builds
3. robust implementation of large interdependent package sets
```

I don't know if the recursive method is all that much cleaner (which is subjective anyway in this case - having less to type but making it significantly harder to evaluate in your head does not follow my intuition of clean code). I tried to convey that in the suggestion, selling it as a trade-off, so that trade-off's pro side should be reflected here.

## Further reading

> There is also `callPackages` and `lib.callPackages` which do a pretty similar
> thing, though they expect that the return value is *not* a package, but a
> packageset.

Reviewer 2: There is a fundamental source of confusion around derivations and packages, and I (barely) tried to be a bit more rigorous about it in my suggestions. I think using them interchangeably is not just plain wrong - because the Nix language has no notion of packages, `nixpkgs` seems to have a very weak definition of a package, at least no authoritative one I'm aware of (one can of course make it up by saying "a package is a file declaring a function where arguments constitute all dependencies of the resulting derivation"), and you explicitly abstain from flakes, which have a definition of package which I find of dubious merit - but also extremely confusing, even to experienced Nixers.

So in general I would strongly urge you to check to make that distinction clear and define the terms you use before you use them. And here specifically please do not introduce another term without defining it. I think one can just say attrset of pkgs, but if package set is a thing in `nixpkgs` it may be worthwhile introducing it.

```suggestion
There is also `callPackages` and `lib.callPackages` which do a pretty similar
thing, though they expect that the return value is *not* a package, but an attribute set of packages.
```

Author: Re: "derivation" vs. "package"… I am aware that the concepts are used quite interchangeably, though a big problem of mine is this:

As far as I understand, the "derivation" is actually the python-like `*.drv` file, which when "realized" becomes the built artifact, with a different hash in the store.

Though in the context of this blogpost, I actually wanted to use "derivation" for the result of the "builder" and "package" for the result of `callPackage`, I see that I am far away from this intend.

I will revise this later and in a seperate commit from the suggested smaller fixes.

Each of the attributes in the returned set will then be overrideable as if you
had called `callPackage` on that.

```nix
# callpackages.nix
{ runCommand }:
{
  a = runCommand "a" { } "echo a > $out";
  b = runCommand "b" { } "echo b > $out";
}
```

```
$ nix-build -E 'with import <nixpkgs> {}; (callPackages ./callpackages.nix { }).a.override { }'
this derivation will be built:
  /nix/store/4sjzxijjfamjqgr8237lr638b8qkabnk-a.drv
building '/nix/store/4sjzxijjfamjqgr8237lr638b8qkabnk-a.drv'...
/nix/store/4n3w8mkswwpfa1vvx3012xbaqskflg2z-a
$ nix-build -E 'with import <nixpkgs> {}; (callPackages ./callpackages.nix { }).a.override { runCommand = runCommandCC; }'
this derivation will be built:
  /nix/store/qj9hg9qiahggi4yk6qsh4wv33jl33f36-a.drv
building '/nix/store/qj9hg9qiahggi4yk6qsh4wv33jl33f36-a.drv'...
/nix/store/50llkafby4vci46qda0xlva24mlghwr0-a

> ```

Reviewer 2: This introduces a new way of evaluating... [packages?](https://github.com/NixOS/nixos-summer/pull/41/files#r953214349)... that was already borderline inscrutable to me on the first run, and will definitely be glanced over by mostly everyone simply due to the wall of text it produces, invalidating your effort of trying to show the extended mechanism.

I suggest making it uniform with previous examples, even if it takes a lot more space and effort. Readers need the explicitness and have to be able to apply learned patterns to learn the additional concepts you're trying to introduce. Stacking more (unrelated, incidental really) things on top will be confusing, and detrimental to conveying your message.

Reviewer 2: Also you would have to explain what `runCommand` is, and how `runCommandCC` differs (or at least *that* it differs for the sake of demonstrating that each of the derivations is overrideable).

Author: Yeah, I totally see your problem with the example I have used here, and after I slept over the blogpost, I came to the conclusion that I should perhaps remove the "Further reading" section as a whole.

In its current form it is already much longer than I originally planned. Getting even more verbose on the shell and code examples would be out of scope of the post.

Author: Removed section in 6491b7cbc30bbff8a36f3e2e809878889b80696f

> ```

Reviewer 2: In general (and this is my suggestion that's still not formalized in Nix documentation, but I will attempt this at some point) please
- separate input and output of console runs so it clear to the reader can see what's what (this can and should be assisted by different colors in the stylesheet as in the stellar German [Ubuntu Wiki Bash Help](https://wiki.ubuntuusers.de/Bash/Hilfe/) page)
- do not prefix console input with `$` because it's not clear to novice users if that's part of the input (distinguishing from calls as `root` should be done in the text, highlighting, or by using `sudo`)
- use semantic markup: `console` for input nothing for output (for CSS to pick it up)
  - I like to use indented code blocks for output, because it makes it easier to distinguish in source

(Sorry, no suggestion possible because GitHub breaks markup, check if you can edit my comment for source)

```console
nix-build -E 'with import <nixpkgs> {}; (callPackages ./callpackages.nix { }).a.override { }'
```

    this derivation will be built:
      /nix/store/4sjzxijjfamjqgr8237lr638b8qkabnk-a.drv
    building '/nix/store/4sjzxijjfamjqgr8237lr638b8qkabnk-a.drv'...
    /nix/store/4n3w8mkswwpfa1vvx3012xbaqskflg2z-a

```console
nix-build -E 'with import <nixpkgs> {}; (callPackages ./callpackages.nix { }).a.override { runCommand = runCommandCC; }'
```

    this derivation will be built:
      /nix/store/qj9hg9qiahggi4yk6qsh4wv33jl33f36-a.drv
    building '/nix/store/qj9hg9qiahggi4yk6qsh4wv33jl33f36-a.drv'...
    /nix/store/50llkafby4vci46qda0xlva24mlghwr0-a

Author: I think indeed that those CSS additions would be nice, but as I am going to remove the "Further reading" section anyway, or at least massively shrink it down to one or two sentences at most, the suggested changes are now obselete.

-------

Also, the follwoing (4 backticks for the `suggestion`) renders fine in the preview (and for the prupose of showing the code example enclosed in a fence of 5 backticks with `md`)

Alternatively using tilde (`~`) fences might work as well.

`````md
````suggestion
```
$ nix-build -E 'with import <nixpkgs> {}; (callPackages ./callpackages.nix { }).a.override { }'
```
````
`````

````suggestion
```
$ nix-build -E 'with import <nixpkgs> {}; (callPackages ./callpackages.nix { }).a.override { }'
```
````

Reviewer 2: Thanks for the reminder, I totally forgot that you can add as many backticks as you want or use different fence symbols.

Author: Removed in 6491b7c

> As you can see, 2 different paths have been produced, due to the fact that we
> replaced the `runCommand`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the Nix package manager, each derivation is uniquely defined, and each corresponding build result produces a unique path in the Nix store, distinguished by a cryptographic hash.

As you can see, two different store paths have been produced for the two different overrides, due to the fact that we set the `runCommand` argument to the value of `runCommandCC` in the second verison.
```

Author: Removed in 6491b7cbc30bbff8a36f3e2e809878889b80696f

{ writeShellScriptBin
, audience ? "world"
}:
writeShellScriptBin "hello" ''
  echo "hello, ${audience}!"
''
```

Building this will still yield the same output as before.

Things get more interesting when we alter `default.nix` another time to make use of this new argument.
Let's call `hello.nix` with the `audience` attribute set to `people`.

Note how we pass the parameter `audience` in the second argument to `callPackage`, which is passed on to the function defined in `hello.nix`:

```nix
# default.nix
let pkgs = import <nixpkgs> { }; in
{
  hello = pkgs.callPackage ./hello.nix { };
  people = pkgs.callPackage ./hello.nix { audience = "people"; };
}
```

Building via `nix-build -A people` will now yield a script that prints `hello,
people`.

We could use the very same syntax to also overwrite the automatically discovered
arguments like `writeShellScriptBin`, though that doesn't make sense here.

This pattern is used widely in `nixpkgs`:
For example, functions which represent Go programs often have a parameter `buildGoModule`, and it is common to see an expression like `callPackage ./go-program.nix { buildGoModule = buildGo116Module; }` to enforce a certain Go compiler version.

> `nixpkgs` is therefore not simply a huge library of pre-configured packages, but a collection of functions that can be used to generate custom configurations of packages and even of whole ecosystems ("All Python packages using my custom interpreter") on the fly without duplicating code.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`nixpkgs` is therefore not simply a huge library of pre-configured packages, but a collection of functions that can be used to generate custom configurations of packages and even of whole ecosystems (e.g. "All Python packages using my custom interpreter") on the fly without duplicating code.
```

Consider this new `default.nix`, where we added a third attribute `folks`:

```nix
# default.nix
let pkgs = import <nixpkgs> { }; in
rec {
  hello = pkgs.callPackage ./hello.nix { };
  people = pkgs.callPackage ./hello.nix { audience = "people"; };
  folks = hello.override { audience = "folks"; };
}
```

Note that the resulting attribute set is now recursive (by the keyword `rec`), that is, attribute values can refer to names from within the same attribute.

Here we take the `hello` derivation and call its `override` attribute as a function, passing the attribute set `{  audience = "folks"; }`. `override` passes `audience` to the original function in `hello.nix` - to be precise, *overrides* whatever arguments have been passed in the original `callPackage` that produced the derivation `hello`.

Building and running the `folks` attribute with `nix-build -A folks` will again produce a new version of the script.
It will print, as you may expect, `hello folks`.

All the other parameters will remain the same as they have been when `hello` was
instantiated.

This is especially useful and often seen on packages that provide many
options to customize the build.

> An example to mention here is the [`neovim`](https://search.nixos.org/packages?channel=22.05&show=neovim&from=0&size=50&sort=relevance&type=packages&query=neovim) attribute in nixpkgs, which has has 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
An example to mention here is the [`neovim`](https://search.nixos.org/packages?channel=22.05&show=neovim&from=0&size=50&sort=relevance&type=packages&query=neovim) attribute in `nixpkgs`, which has has 
```
